Book I
---
I went down to Piraeus yesterday with Glaucon, the son of Ariston, to offer a
prayer to the goddess, also I wanted to watch the festival to see how they would
conduct it since this was the first time it was being celebrated. The parade of
Athenians struck me as excellent and the show put on by the Thracians was every
bit as impressive I thought. We offered our prayers watched the festival and
then started off on our journey back to town. We were already on our way home
when we were spotted by Polemarchus, the son of Cephalus. He got his slave to
run after us and tell us to wait for him. The slave tugged at my cloak from
behind and said, Polemarchus says you are to wait. I turned around and asked him
where his master was. There he is, he said, coming along behind you, wait for
him. We will, said Glaucon. In a few moments Polemarchus reached us with
Glaucon's brother Adeimantus, Niceratus the son of Nicias, and a few others.
They had been watching the procession apparently. And Polemarchus said, it looks
as if you're all on your way back to the city Socrates, you're not staying then?
That's not a bad guess, I replied. Do you see how many of us there are, he
asked, yes, well then he said you must either get the better of all these people
or else stay here. There is another possibility I said. We might persuade you
that you should let us go. And do you really think you could persuade us he said
if we refuse to listen? Of course not said Glaucon, in that case make your
decision on the assumption we're not going to listen. Haven't you heard about
the torch race, Adeimantus added. This evening on horseback in honour of the
Goddess? On horseback I said, that's something new. Do you mean a relay race on
horseback passing torches from one to another. Yes, said Polemarchus and they're
going to have an all night ceremony as well which should be worth watching, we
can go out and watch it after dinner. There'll be lots of young people there, we
can spend some time with them and talk to them, do stay, please say yes. It
looks as if we shall have to, said Glaucon if that's your decision I said, we
shall.

So we went back to the house of Polemarchus where we found Polemarchus's
brothers, Lysias and Euthydemus as well as Thrasymachus of Chalcedon,
Charmantides from the deme of Paeania, and Kleitophon the son of Aristonymus,
also there in the house was Polemarchus's father Cephalus, it was a long time
since I'd seen him and I found him much aged, he was wearing a Garland and
sitting on a sort of cushioned stool. He'd just been conducting a sacrifice in
the courtyard. There was a circle of stools around him, so we sat down with him.
As soon as he saw me Cephalus started to make me welcome, you don't often come
down to visit us in Piraeus Socrates he said, you should though. If I were still
strong enough to make the journey up to town without difficulty, there would be
no need for you to come here, we would go to you, but as things are, you should
come more often. I can assure you speaking for myself that the more the
pleasures of the body fade the greater becomes one's desire and taste for
conversation. So do please spend some time with these young men, do come here
and visit us, regard us as your friends as your family even. With pleasure,
Cephalus. I replied. I love talking to the very old it's as if they're a long
way ahead of us on a road which we too are probably going to have to travel. I
feel we should learn from them what the road is like, whether it's steep and
rough going or gentle and easy. In particular I'd very much like to hear how it
strikes you now that you've actually reached the time of life, which the Poets
call old age the threshold, what is your report on it? Would you call it a
difficult time of life? I'll tell you exactly how it strikes me Socrates,
there's a group of us who meet fairly often, we're all about the same age so
we're following the words of the old proverb. When we meet, most of them start
complaining, they say they miss the things they used to enjoy when they were
young, and they recall their sexual exploits, their drinking their feasting and
everything connected with those pleasures. They get upset as if they'd suffered
some great loss, as if then they had led a wonderful life whereas now they're
not live at all. Some of them also complain about the lack of respect shown by
their families towards old age, and under this heading they recite a litany of
grievances against old age. I think they're putting the blame in the wrong place
Socrates. If old age were to blame, then not only would I have felt the same way
about old age but so would everyone else who has ever reached this age and yet
I've met several people who are not like this, most notably, Sophocles the poet,
I was there once when someone asked him, how is your sex life Sophocles? Are you
still capable of making love to a woman? Don't talk about it my good sir was
Sophocles's reply, it is with the greatest relief that I've escaped it, like
escaping from a fierce and frenzied master. I thought that a good reply at the
time and I still think it a good one now, old age is altogether a time of great
peace and freedom from that sort of thing. When our appetites fade and loosen
their grip on us, then what happens is exactly what Sophocles was talking about.
It is a final release from a bunch of insane masters. Both in this and in your
relations with your family, there is only one thing responsible and that is not
old age but your character. For those who are civilized and contented then even
old age is only a slight burden. Otherwise for those who are not like this, both
old age and youth prove hard to cope with. I was very impressed by what he said
and I wanted him to go on talking. So I prompted him further, I suspect most
people don't believe you Cephalus when you say that, they think it is not your
character which makes old age easy for you, but the fact that you have plenty of
money the rich they say have many consolations. And the there's some truth in
what they say but not as much truth as they think. Themistocles's famous saying
is very much to the point here, a man from Serifos started making disparaging
remarks about him and telling him that his fame was due not to his own merits
but to those of his city. Themistocles's reply was that though he himself would
never have been famous if he had been born in Serifos, neither would the other
man have been if he had been born in Athens. The same applies to those who are
not rich and who find old age hard to bear. In poverty even the right
temperament will not find old age altogether easy, whereas the wrong temperament
even with the aid of wealth will never be at peace with itself. What would you
say is the greatest benefit you have derived from your possession of great
wealth, I said. One which many people might not be inclined to believe if I told
them but you can take my word for it Socrates that when you are confronted by
the thought of your own death, you are visited by fear and anxiety about things
which never troubled you before, the story is told about what happens in Hades
that anyone who is unjust here will have to pay for it there, stories you once
laughed at begin to trouble your mind that's why I attached the greatest
importance to the possession of money, not for everyone but for those of good
character. If you want to avoid defrauding people or lying to them however
reluctantly or going to the world below in a state of terror after failing to
pay what you owe, whether sacrifices to a god or money to a man, then the
possession of money contributes in no small measure to this end. That's
admirably put Cephalus I said, but since you've brought up the subject of
Justice can we say quite simply that it is truthfulness and returning anything
you may have received from anyone else, or is it sometimes right to behave in
these ways and sometimes wrong. Let me give you an example, suppose you borrowed
some weapons from a friend when he was in his right mind, suppose he later went
mad and then asked for them back again everyone would agree I imagine that you
shouldn't give them back to him and that anyone who did give them back or who
was even prepared to be completely truthful to someone in this condition would
not be doing the right thing. Correct he said. This is not the definition of
justice then, that it is telling the truth and returning what you have been
given. Yes it is Socrates, Polemarchus interrupted at least it is if we are to
believe Simonides. I'd just like to say Cephalus put in that this is where I
hand the discussion over to you, it's time I was doing something about the
sacrifices. Well am I not Polemarchus, your heir. You certainly are he replied
with a laugh and went off to his sacrifices.

Tell me then I said, you, who have inherited the argument, what does Simonides
say about Justice that you think is correct. That it is just to pay everyone
what is owed to him, that's what he says and I think he's right. Well I said,
Simonides is a wise and inspired man, it is certainly not easy to disagree with
him, but what on earth does he mean by this remark? You may well know
Polemarchus, I have no idea. He obviously doesn't mean what we were talking
about just now, if one person gives something to another for safekeeping and
then asks for it back when he's not in his right mind. Simonides doesn't mean
that the other person should give it to him and yet I imagine the thing which
was given for safekeeping is owed to the person who gave it. Isn't it? Yes, in
that situation when someone goes out of his mind and then asks for it back,
isn't returning it completely out of the question? Yes it is. That isn't what
Simonides means apparently when he says that it is just to pay back what is owed
or due. No it certainly isn't he said. What he thinks is due to friends is to do
them good not harm. I understand I replied, if one person gives back to to
another money which the other has given him for safekeeping he is not giving
what is due if he is returning it and the others receiving it are harmful, and
if the two of them are friends. Isn't that what you think Simonides means? Yes
it is. What about enemies? Should you give them whatever is in fact due to them?
You certainly should he said, and what is due between enemies is what is
appropriate something harmful. Simonides was speaking as a poet then apparently
and disguising his definition of justice, what he meant it seems was that
Justice was giving any individual what was appropriate for him, but he called it
what was owed. Yes that must have been what he meant. Suppose then one of us had
said to him, Simonides, take the art or skill which is called medicine what does
it give that is due and appropriate and to what does it give it? What do you
think his answer would have been. Obviously he replied, he would have said it
gives the body drugs and food and drink. And the art of cookery, what does it
give that is due and appropriate and to what does it give it? It gives flavour
to cooked food. Very well, then what about the art or skill which we would call
Justice, what does it give and to what does it give it? Well if we're to follow
the previous definition Socrates, it gives benefits and injuries to friends and
enemies. Does he mean then that helping your friends and harming your enemies is
Justice. I think so. All right, when people are unwell when it's a question of
sickness and health, who is best at helping them if they are friends and harming
them if they are enemies? A doctor. And when they're at sea who can best help or
harm them amid the dangers of a sea voyage? A ship's Captain. What about the
just man in what activity and for what purpose is he the one best able to treat
his friends well and his enemies badly. In war and alliances I think. Very well,
now when people aren't ill, my dear Polemarchus, a doctor is nouse to them.
True. And when they not at sea, a ship's Captain is no use to them. No. Does
that mean the just man is no use to them when they're not at war. No I'm sure it
doesn't. Justice is something useful even in peace time then? Yes it is. But
then so is agriculture isn't it? Yes. For producing crops? Yes. And shoe making.
Yes that's useful for for producing shoes you would say presumably? Of course.
What about Justice then, when you say it's useful in peace time what is it
useful for, what does it produce? Contracts Socrates. And by contracts do you
mean partnerships or something else? I mean Partnerships. All right, is the just
man a good and useful partner when it comes to playing backgammon, or would
someone who plays backgammon be more use. Someone who plays backgammon would be
more use. And when it comes to brick laying or building in stone is the just man
a more useful and better partner than a builder. Of course not. Well, in what
kind of partnership is the just man a better partner than a lyre player in the
way a lyre player is better at playing the notes. In partnerships involving
money I think. Unless by any chance Polemarchus it's a question of putting the
money to some use, if you have to buy or sell a horse jointly for a sum of
money, in that case I imagine, someone who knows about horses is of more use,
isn't he? Apparently. And for buying or selling a ship you'd want a ship builder
or ship's captain. So it seems. In what situation then requiring the joint use
of silver or gold is the just man more useful than anyone else? When there's a
need to deposit money and have it kept safe. You mean when there's no need to
put it to any use, you just want it to stay where it is. That's right. So it's
when money is useless that Justice is useful for dealing with it. It looks like
it. And a pruning knife when you want to keep it safe, then Justice is useful
both in public life and in private life, but when you want to use it then the
art of viticulture is what you want. Apparently. And are you going to say the
same about a shield or a lyre that Justice is useful when you need to keep them
safe and not use them, but that when you do need to use them, then you want the
solders art and the art of music? I shall have to say that. And in all other
examples Justice is useless when it comes to using any of them and useful only
when they are useless? I suppose so he said. Though personally I can't any
longer remember what I did say, but one thing I do think still and that is that
Justice is treating your friends well and your enemies badly. By friends do you
mean the people each individual believes to be good or those who really are good
even if he doesn't realize it and the same with enemies. In all probability he
replied, people will like those they think are good and dislike those they think
are evil, and do people ever make mistakes in this, do they often think people
are good when they're not and vice versa. Yes they do make mistakes. So for
these people, are the good their enemies and the bad their friends? They
certainly are. Is it nonetheless right for these people when this happens to
treat the wicked well and the good badly? It looks like it. And the good are
just they're not the kind of people who do wrong? True. So according to your
argument, it is right to harm those who do no wrong. Impossible Socrates. It
looks as if there's something wrong with the argument. Then it must be right I
said, to treat the unjust badly and the just well. That sounds better. In that
case Polemarchus there are many people for whom it'll turn out if their judgment
of people has been at fault, that it is right to treat their friends badly since
their friends are evil and their enemies well since their enemies are good, in
those circumstances we shall end up saying the exact opposite of the definition
we quoted from Simonides. Yes he said it certainly can turn out like that. Let's
change our definition, we're probably not defining friend and enemy correctly.
How are we defining them Polemarchus. We said that the person who seemed to be
good was a friend, and now how do you want to change that definition. If someone
both seems to be good and is let's call him a friend, if he seems to be but
isn't really, let's say that he seems to be a friend but isn't really a friend
and let the same definition apply to an enemy. On this definition it appears the
good man will be a friend and the one who is no good will be an enemy. Yes. Do
you want us to make an addition to our definition of justice, our first
definition was that it was just to help a friend and and harm an enemy. Do you
want us now to add to that and say that it is just to help a friend if he is
good and harm an enemy if he is bad. Yes he said I think that would be an
excellent definition. But is it really in the nature of a just man I asked, to
treat anyone in the world badly. It certainly is he said. He should treat badly
those who are wicked, his enemies. If you treat treat a horse badly, does it
become better or worse? Worse. Worse by the standard we use to judge dogs or the
standard we use to judge horses. The standard we use to judge horses. And dogs
the same if you treat them badly they become worse by the standard we use to
judge dogs not horses? They must do. What about humans my friend, are we to say
in the the same way that if they are treated badly they become worse by the
standard we use to judge Human Excellence. Certainly. But isn't Justice a form
of Human Excellence. Again it must be. In which case my friend members of the
human race who are treated badly must necessarily become more unjust. It looks
like it. Are musicians able by means of music to make people unmusical? No
that's impossible. Can horsemen make people unskilled with horses by means of
horsemanship. No. And can the just make people unjust by means of Justice, or in
general, can the good use Human Excellence to make people bad. No that's
impossible. Yes because it's not the property of heat I assume to make things
cold, it's the property of its opposite. Yes. Nor is it the property of dryness
to make things wet but of its opposite. Yes. And it is certainly not the
property of good to do harm or treat people badly, but of its opposite.
Apparently. And the just man is good. Yes. In that case Polemarchus, it is not
the property of the just man to treat his friend or anyone else badly, it is the
property of his opposite the unjust man.

Even in the middle of our conversation Thrasymachus had repeatedly tried to take
control of the discussion, but each time he had been prevented by those sitting
round us who wanted to hear the discussion through to the end, but when we
reached this stopping place in the argument, he was incapable of remaining
silent any longer he gathered himself and sprang at us like a wild beast at its
prey. Speaking up loud and clear, Thrasymachus said, what's this nonsense that
has got into you two Socrates why be so obliging? Why keep giving way to one
another? If you really want to know what Justice is then stop simply asking
questions and scoring points by proving that any answer given by anyone else is
wrong. You know perfectly well it's easier to ask questions than to give answers
come on, why don't you give some answers yourself, tell us what you say justice
is, and don't go telling us that it's what's necessary or what what's beneficial
or what's advantageous or what's profitable or or what's good for you, I won't
take any of that stuff no, tell us please quite clearly exactly what you mean.
Don't be angry with us Thrasymachus I said, with some apprehension, if
Polemarchus and I are making mistakes in our examination of the arguments, I
assure you we're not making them on purpose if we're looking for gold we
wouldn't deliberately give way to one another in our search and so destroy our
chances of finding it so since what we are actually looking for is Justice, a
thing more valuable than a large quantity of gold, you can't imagine we are so
stupid as to make concessions to one another and not be determined to bring it
as clearly as possible into view, believe us my friend, the trouble is we lack
the ability, so when you clever people see our efforts, pity is really a far
more appropriate reaction than annoyance. This brought an unpleasant laugh from
Thrasymachus. Oh my God he said, I knew it the famous modesty of Socrates, I
predicted it, I told these people you'd refuse to give any answers that you
pretend to be modest that you'd do anything to avoid answering if anyone asked
you a question. Clever of you Thrasymachus, clever enough to know what would
happen if you were to ask someone what 12 was but then give him a warning before
he answered, now look here don't go to telling us that 12 is twice 6 or 3 * 4 or
6 * 2 or 4 * 3, I'm not going to take any nonsense of that sort from you. It was
obvious to you I imagine that if you asked the question in that way no one could
possibly answer it. Is that just what you're going to do now? Are you going to
give one of the answers I told you not to give. It wouldn't surprise me I said,
if on reflection I came to that conclusion. What if if I give you an answer
about Justice which is quite different from all those other answers, a much
better answer than those what do you think should be your penalty. Well
obviously the penalty appropriate to someone who doesn't know, he should learn I
take it from the person who does know. You innocent! Said Thrasymachus, no, you
must do more than learn, you must pay me some money as well. Very well, as soon
as I have any I will. You do have some said Glaucon, if it's money you're
worried about Thrasymachus, go ahead and speak we will all pay up for Socrates.
I'll bet you will he said anything to allow Socrates to play his usual trick,
not answer the question himself but wait for someone else to answer it, and then
take what he says and try to prove it wrong. Really my dear fellow I said, how
could anyone answer the question if for a start he didn't know the answer,
didn't so much as claim to know it. And on top of that even supposing he did
have some idea on the subject, if he'd been told by a man of some authority not
to say any of the things he thought. No it makes much more sense for you to
speak, you're the one who claims to know the answer and have something to say,
so please as a favour tome don't keep your answer to yourself, give Glaucon here
and the others the benefit of your knowledge. Hear it then he said, I say that
Justice is simply what is good for the stronger. Well where's all that praise?
You're not going to give it, are you? Yes I will, as soon as I understand what
you mean. At the moment I still don't know. What is good for the stronger you
say is just, what do you mean by that Thrasymachus, if Polydesmus the all-in
wrestler is stronger than us, and eating beef is good for building his body, you
presumably don't mean that this food is also good and right for us who are
weaker than him. Socrates you're beneath contempt, you're taking what I said in
the way which makes it easiest to misrepresent my meaning. Not at all my friend,
but you'll have to tell me more clearly what you mean. All right he said. You
must be aware that some cities are tyrannies, some are democracies and others
aristocracies. Of course. And what is in control in each city is the ruling
power. Yes. Every ruling power makes laws for its own good: a democracy makes
democratic laws, a tyranny tyrannical laws and so on. In making these laws they
make it clear that what is good for them, the rulers is what is just for their
subjects, if anyone disobeys, they punish him for breaking the law and acting
unjustly, that's what I mean, my friend, when I say that in all cities the same
thing is just, namely what is good for the ruling authority. This I take it is
where the power lies and the result is for anyone who looks at it in the right
way that the same thing is just everywhere, what is good for the stronger. Now I
understand what you mean I said, though whether or not it is true remains to be
seen. So even your answer Thrasymachus, is that what is good for a person is
just though that was answer you told me firmly not to give, but you add the
qualification for the stronger. A trivial addition you may say. That's not yet
clear. It may well be an important one. What is clear is that we must examine
whether what you say is true. Like you, I agree that Justice is something that
is good for a person but while you qualify it as what is good for the stronger,
I'm not so sure, we should examine the question. Go on then, examine it! I shall
I said. Tell me don't you also say that it is right for subjects to obey their
rulers. I do. And are they infallible the rulers in all these cities, or are
they capable of making mistakes? They are certainly I imagine capable of making
mistakes. So when they set about enacting laws do they enact some correctly but
a certain number incorrectly? In my opinion yes. And correctly is enacting laws
which are in their own interest and incorrectly is enacting laws which are
against their own interest, is that what you mean? Yes. But whatever they enact,
their subjects must carry it out and this is justice. Of course. In that case
according to your definition, it is not only just to do what is good for the
stronger but also its opposite, what is not good for him. What do you mean he
said. I mean what you mean I think. Let's look at it more closely. Haven't we
agreed that the rulers in giving orders to their subjects to do anything,
sometimes make mistakes about what is in their own best interest, but that it is
just for the subjects to carry out whatever orders their rulers give them isn't
that what we have agreed? Yes he said I accept that. Then you must also accept I
said, that we have agreed it is just to do things which are not good for the
rulers and the stronger when the rulers inadvertently issue orders which are
harmful to themselves, and you say it is just for their subjects to carry out
the orders of their rulers, in that situation most wise Thrasymachus, isn't the
inevitable result that it is just to do the exact opposite of what you say,
after all the weaker have been ordered to do what is not good for the stronger.
Indeed they have Socrates said Polemarchus, no question about it. No question at
all Kleitophon interrupted, if you're acting as a witness for Socrates. Who
needs a witness said Polemarchus. Thrasymachus himself agreed that rulers
sometimes issue orders which are bad for themselves but that it is right for
their subjects to carry out these orders. Yes Polemarchus, because carrying out
orders issued by rulers was what thus defined as just. Yes Kleitophon, but in
his definition he also said that what was good for the stronger was just, he
gave both those definitions and then went on to agree that those who are
stronger sometimes tell those who are weaker, their subjects, to do what what is
bad for them, the stronger. It follows from these admissions that what is good
for those who are stronger would be no more just than what is not good for them.
When he talked about what was good for the stronger said Kleitophon, he meant
what the stronger thought was good for him, this is what the weaker must do and
that was his definition of justice. Those weren't the words he used said
Polemarchus. It's neither here nor there Polemarchus I said, if those are the
words Thrasymachus is using now, let's take it in that sense. Tell me
Thrasymachus was that how you wanted to define justice as what the stronger
thinks is good for him whether it really is good or not, is that what we should
take you to be saying? Certainly not he said, do you imagine I regard a person
who makes a mistake at the moment when he is making the mistake as stronger.
That's certainly what I thought you meant when you agreed that rulers are not
infallible that they sometimes make mistakes. You're always trying to trick
people Socrates, in the way you argue, I mean, if someone makes a mistake in
treating the sick, do you call him a doctor by virtue of the actual mistake or
an accountant who makes a mistake at the precise moment when he is making his
mistake by virtue of this mistake, no I think that's just the form of words we
use, we say the doctor made a mistake, the accountant made a mistake, the
teacher made a mistake, but the reality I think is that none of them to the
extent that he is what we call him ever makes a mistake. In precise language
since you like speaking precisely, no one who exercises a skill ever makes a
mistake. So the ruler to the extent that he is a ruler does not make mistakes
and since he does not make mistakes he does enact what is best for him, and this
is what his subject must carry out. So as I said originally, my definition is
that it is just to do what is good for the stronger. Very well Thrasymachus I
said, so you think I'm a trickster do you? I certainly do. You think I've been
asking the questions I have been asking with the deliberate intention of winning
the argument unfairly. I'm quite sure of it it won't do you any good though you
can't use unfair arguments without my noticing, and once I notice what you're up
to you don't have the resources to defeat me in open argument. As if I'd even
dream of trying, but since we don't want this situation to arise again, could
you make one thing clear when you say it is right for the weaker to do what is
good for the stronger, do you mean the ruler and the stronger in normal usage or
in the precise sense you were talking about just now. I mean the ruler in the
most precise sense possible. Tell me then, you were talking just now about the
doctor in the precise sense, is he a businessman or a healer of the sick? And
make sure it's the true doctor you're talking about. He's a Healer of the sick.
What about a ship's captain, is a ship's captain in the correct sense a master
of sailors or a sailor? A master of sailors. It's not an objection I take it
that he sails in the ship, nor is he for that reason to be called a sailor since
the title ship's captain does not depend on his sailing but on his art or skill
and his authority over the sailors. True he said. And for each of these is there
something which is good for him? Yes. Doesn't the art or skill come into
existence for just this reason to seek out and provide what is good for each
person. Yes it does. For each of these skills then, is there anything else which
is good for it apart from being a as perfect as possible. I don't understand
your question. Suppose you asked me if it was enough for the body to be the body
or whether it needed something else, I would reply it certainly does need
something else that's the reason why the art of medicine has come to be
invented, because the body is defective and therefore not self-sufficient, so
the art of medicine was developed to provide it with the things which were good
for it. Do you think I'd be right in giving that answer or not? Yes I think
you'd be right. What about medicine itself, is that defective? Does any art or
skill for that matter stand in need of some virtue or excellence in the way that
eyes need sight and ears need hearing, and sight and hearing require an art or
skill to preside over them, an art or skill which will think about and provide
what is good for them, is there any defect in the actual art or skill itself?
Isn't the art or skill itself in the precise sense without fault or blemish if
it is correct so long as it is entirely what it is, and when you answer, use
words in the precise sense you were talking about, is it as I have described or
not? It is as you have described he said, apparently. In that case I said the
art of medicine does not think about what is good for the art of medicine but
what is good for the body. Yes. And horsemanship does not think about what is
good for horsemanship but what is good for horses. Nor does any art or skill
think about what is good for itself, it has no need to. No. It thinks about what
is good for the thing of which it is, the art or skill. Apparently. But surely
thus arts and skills control and have power over the objects of which they are
the arts and skills. He conceded this though with great reluctance. In which
case there's no branch or knowledge which thinks about or prescribes what is
good for the stronger but only what is good for the weaker for what is under its
control. He agreed to this too in the end though he tried to resist it, and when
he did agree I continued. Isn't it a fact that no doctor to the extent that he
is a doctor thinks about or prescribes what is good for the doctor? No. He
thinks about what is good for the patient, after all it was agreed that a doctor
in the precise sense is responsible for bodies, he's not a businessman, isn't
that what was agreed? Thrasymachus assented. And that the ship's captain in the
precise sense was in command of sailors not a sailor? Yes that was agreed. So a
ship's captain or commander of this type will not think about or prescribe what
is good for the ship's captain but what is good for the sailor for the person
under his command. He agreed though reluctantly. And so Thrasymachus I said, no
one in any position of authority to the extent that he is in authority thinks
about or prescribes what is good for himself but only what is good for the
person or thing under his authority, for whose benefit he himself exercises his
art or skill. Everything he says and everything he does is said or done with
this person or thing in mind, with a view to what is good and appropriate for
the person or thing under his authority.
